Add space invaders JS tutorial blog post (#80)
input-output-hk/engineering: blog/2024-02-08-space-invaders-tutorial.md

---
slug: 2024-02-08-space-invaders-tutorial
title: Porting a Haskell Game to the JavaScript Backend
authors: [josh]
tags: [GHC JavaScript, tutorial]

> SpaceInvaders on GitHub is a demo game written by user ivanperez-keera to demonstrate Haskell's Yampa library. It was recently ported by AntanasKal to work in the browser using the WASM backend.

Author: Done

> In this post, we will port SpaceInvaders to also work on the JavaScript backend as a worked example of using the JavaScript backend with the browser. Comparisons with Wasm will also be made, though comparing backends isn't the main focus of this post.

Author: I've made some changes to this effect, but I'm not sure on the new version either.

> In this post, we will port SpaceInvaders to also work on the JavaScript backend as a worked example of using the JavaScript backend with the browser. Comparisons with Wasm will also be made, though comparing backends isn't the main focus of this post.

Reviewer: It's a little too formulaic, don't be afraid to have a voice, this one should be fun after all. I can imagine something like:

```
<N> weeks ago <person> posted a demo of wasm space invaders on <site> to great fanfare. Truly 2024 is a year of spoils in the haskell community. But this got us (the IOG team and JS backend maintainers) thinking "Well if they can do space invaders, what can we do?" So in the spirit of friendly competition, I (Josh) poured a tall cup of coffee, sat down on a 49 C Australian summer afternoon and ....
```

> ## Background Knowledge

Author: I've tried to integrate this with the other comment but I'm not sure if it sounds awkward now

The Yampa library in Haskell is based on Functional Reactive Programming (FRP) for modelling programs as events and time-varying values. FRP is useful in the domain of UIs and games because the encoding of events helps with handling user inputs and outputs.

For this tutorial, we'll assume that the main game logic in Yampa is the same across backends, and that our main concern is in feeding values in and out of the edges of this logic.

To accept values out of the game logic so that we can use them in our JavaScript rendering functions, we'll use the `reactInit` function from Yampa. It has the following type:

```haskell
reactInit :: IO a -> (ReactHandle a b -> Bool -> b -> IO Bool) -> SF a b -> IO (ReactHandle a b)
```

The first value to `reactInit` initialises the input state, `a`.

> The second argument to `reactInit` is a function that receives the current game state, `b`, on each frame and can perform arbitrary `IO`. For our usage here, we don't need the other arguments passed to our function - we're just rendering the game state in `IO`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The second argument to `reactInit` is a function that receives the current game state, `b`, on each frame and can perform arbitrary `IO`. Our usage is simple --- we're just rendering the game state in `IO` --- so we can safely throw away `ReactHandle a b` and `Bool`.
```

You might also consider renaming `a` and `b` to `old` and `current` or something like that.

The third argument to `reactInit` is an `SF a b` - a "signal function" that converts Yampa values from `a` to `b`. This is the game logic, which for the purposes of this tutorial we'll just treat as the FRP equivalent to a function of type `a -> b`.

The value that `reactInit` returns is a `ReactHandle a b`. We'll use it like a channel that we can write input values of type `a` to. For this, Yampa's `react` function is available:

```haskell
react :: ReactHandle a b -> (DTime, Maybe a) -> IO Bool
```

> In the second argument to `react`, we pass time delta for the frame, paired with an optional input value. We can wrap `react` partially applied to the `ReactHandle` we got from `reactInit` and export the wrapped function to JavaScript for inputting values from the browser.

Reviewer: Show the wrapper. This sentence is "telling", try to "show, not tell"

## Exporting `runGameStep` to JavaScript

> To input values for the mouse location and button state from JavaScript, we wrap a call to `react` with the `gameReactHandle` that `reactInit` returns. In this case, `gameReactHandle` is a top level binding because the call to `reactInit` uses `unsafePerformIO`. This is done to share code with the Wasm implementation, but in principle it's possible to define `runGameStep` as a local binding in `main` to avoid using `unsafePerformIO`. For a program only targetting the JavaScript backend, the local binding method would be preferred, and an example of how to do this will be provided later.

Reviewer: state what you achieved in the last section:

```suggestion
Now we can render graphics and write them to the screen. To input values for the mouse location and button state from JavaScript, we wrap a call to `react` with the `gameReactHandle` that `reactInit` returns. In this case, `gameReactHandle` is a top level binding because the call to `reactInit` uses `unsafePerformIO`. This is done to share code with the Wasm implementation, but in principle it's possible to define `runGameStep` as a local binding in `main` to avoid using `unsafePerformIO`. For a program only targetting the JavaScript backend, the local binding method would be preferred, and an example of how to do this will be provided later.
```

Reviewer: After you introduce `gameReactHandle` show its code, then explain its code. Doesn't have to be much, just a single sentence that says it spawns a random generator and initializes the game state.

```haskell
gameReactHandle :: ReactHandle WinInput (Score, [ObsObjState])
gameReactHandle = unsafePerformIO $ do
    let g = mkStdGen 123
    reactInit
        (pure $ WinInput 0.0 0.0 False)
        actuate
        (parseWinInput >>> restartingGame g)

runGameStep :: Double -> Double -> Bool -> Double -> IO ()
runGameStep x y pressed deltaTime = do
  _ <- react gameReactHandle (deltaTime, Just (WinInput x y pressed))
  return ()
```

> With the function we want to export defined, we need to prepare some JavaScript code to receive the exported Haskell function. We declare a global `var runGameStep_` to store the exported function, and a JavaScript function `setRunGameStep(fn)` that sets the global.

Reviewer: `the function` is `runGameStep`? And I think you mean this is a foreign export right? Not a module export.

```javascript
var runGameStep_;

function setRunGameStep(fn) {
  runGameStep_ = fn;
}
```

Then, `setRunGameStep` is foreign imported into Haskell:

```haskell
foreign import javascript "setRunGameStep" setGameStep
  :: Callback (JSVal -> IO ()) -> IO ()

```

> We'll also need a JavaScript function to call the callback, which we'll also name `runGameStep`. In this function, we package the arguments into a single `JSVal` to be given to our exported Haskell function. `JSVal` is just a Haskell type used to refer to untyped JavaScript data that isn't managed by GHC's runtime. We have to package the arguments instead of passing multiple `JSVal`s because `base` (currently) only defines `Callback`s up to 3 arguments. The exact format of the package isn't too important - we just need to match it later when we unpack the data.

Reviewer: State the big picture. The JS runtime still doesn't have everything it needs to iterate the game state because the state is in the Haskell Heap right? And this is why you need both the foreign export and the callback?

```javascript
//#OPTIONS: CPP

function unpackGameStepArgs(args) {
  RETURN_UBX_TUP4(args.x, args.y, args.pressed, args.deltaTime);
}
```

GHC will treat a value returned with a `RETURN_UBX_TUP` macro as an unboxed tuple, so the `UnboxedTuples` and `MagicHash` language extensions are required. Then, we can foreign import `unpackGameStepArgs`. Because `Double` and `Bool` are both base types in the GHC JavaScript runtime, we don't need to do any further conversions for the unpacked arguments. For more information on which types can be converted automatically, and how other types can be marshalled, see https://ghc.gitlab.haskell.org/ghc/doc/users_guide/javascript.html#javascript-ffi-types in the GHC users guide.

```haskell
{-# LANGUAGE MagicHash, UnboxedTuples #-}

foreign import javascript "unpackGameStepArgs" unpackGameStepArgs
  :: JSVal -> (# Double, Double, Bool, Double #)
```

> Next, we can write the actual wrapper function that will get exported. Here we use the unboxed tuple syntax to deconstruct the tuple returned by `unpackGameStepArgs` and pass them into `runGameStep`.

Reviewer: aha so this is the export!?

main = do
  rgs <- syncCallback1 ThrowWouldBlock runGameStep'
  setGameStep rgs
  runGame
```

To instead write this using local bindings and avoid `unsafePerformIO`, `main` would look like:

```haskell
runGameStep' :: ReactHandle WinInput (Score, [ObsObjState]) -> JSVal -> IO ()
runGameStep' args =
  let
    (# x, y, pressed, deltaTime #) = unpackGameStepArgs args
  in
    runGameStep x y pressed deltaTime

main :: IO ()
main = do

  gameReactHandle <- do
    let g = mkStdGen 123
    reactInit
        (pure $ WinInput 0.0 0.0 False)
        actuate
        (parseWinInput >>> restartingGame g)

  rgs <- syncCallback1 ThrowWouldBlock (runGameStep' gameReactHandle)
  setGameStep rgs
  runGame

```

This isn't done in the Wasm implementation because `runGameStep` is exported using foreign exports, instead of as a `Callback`, which only exists in the JavaScript backend.

```haskell
foreign export ccall runGameStep :: Double -> Double -> Bool -> Double -> IO ()
```

It is potentially possible to store the `gameReactHandle` value elsewhere for Wasm to avoid the use of `unsafePerformIO` with `foreign export`, but that's beyond the scope of this tutorial.

## Feeding in JavaScript Inputs

> We now have everything set up to trigger input events in JavaScript that will feed into the game logic implemented in Yampa. Next, we'll need to set up browser event listeners on various mouse actions.

Reviewer: Good! This is the big picture update that is missing from most of the post.

```
foreign import ccall "fillRect" fillRect :: Double -> Double -> Double -> Double -> IO ()
```

In the case of Wasm, functions to be imported into Haskell must be exported from JavaScript in a dictionary:

```
const externalFunctions = {
    // ...

    fillRect : (x, y, width, height) => {
        context.fillRect(x, y, width, height);
    }

    // ...
}
```

## Putting It All Together

Now that we've written all the code to interact with the browser, we can put it into a JavaScript file, which we'll call `jsbits/main.js`. There's no naming requirements for this, and it could be split up into multiple files is preferred.

Then, we can add this to our `.cabal` file using the `js-sources` field, which works similarly to `c-sources`. `js-sources` is supported for library targets from Cabal 3.10, and for executable targets from Cabal 3.12.

```
library
  js-sources: jsbits/main.js
```

or

```
executable SpaceInvaders
  js-sources: jsbits/main.js
```

> Finally, we can build the project `cabal build all` and find the resulting `.jsexe` folder in Cabal's `dist-newstyle` build directory. The path will look something like `./dist-newstyle/build/javascript-ghcjs/ghc-9.8.1/SpaceInvaders-0.14.2/x/jsBuild/build/jsBuild/jsBuild.jsexe/`. For this particular project, we've named the executable `jsBuild` in the Cabal file target. In the `.jsexe` folder is an `all.js` file. This file links everything required to run the project into a single file, including libraries and `js-sources`.

Author: Done
